Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Hi Wendy
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Can you hear me.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Your audio.
Hear me
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: How are you
Windy Borjas: How are you
Okay.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Is your internet connection. Okay.
Windy Borjas: Really, it's kind of choppy.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah, kind of choppy as well.
Windy Borjas: I don't know. I'm like,
Windy Borjas: Ooh, so this is like the best. It's gonna get
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So how have you been since we last spoke
Windy Borjas: Okay.
Windy Borjas: Yeah, better
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That's good, that's good.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: updates for you.
Windy Borjas: Um,
Windy Borjas: No, nothing new. I missed
Windy Borjas: Group on Tuesday I was over at my grandma's with my daughters, and we are on the trampoline. And I totally for
Windy Borjas: Everything in life, pretty much.
Windy Borjas: By the time I realized it was already have 10 or something. So when it's
Sorry.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: I'm sorry, what time do you what days and times. Do you have group.
Windy Borjas: On Tuesdays.
Windy Borjas: At 430
Oh,
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Well what was important to discuss today.
Windy Borjas: Not really anything real heavy on my mind today.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That's good, that's good to have some days where know
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Feel a little lighter. You don't have to worry about too much.
Windy Borjas: My daughter just
Windy Borjas: Went to this groceries, something to make her
Windy Borjas: So we're
Windy Borjas: Here at home and relax.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You
Windy Borjas: Hmm, yeah.
Windy Borjas: Yeah.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Refresh my memory. Where's your, what's your ethnicity, where, where are you in your family.
Windy Borjas: I'm Native American, I was born in Idaho.
Windy Borjas: And I'm sure Tony and tailor.
Your what
Windy Borjas: She's shown me and
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Okay, tell me more about that culture. I'm always curious to learn about the Native American culture.
Windy Borjas: Um,
Windy Borjas: Are
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You want you can stop the video. I wonder if I hear you better. There's no video
Windy Borjas: Most part
Windy Borjas: Can you hear me.
Yeah.
Windy Borjas: Is the connection better
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yes. Okay.
Windy Borjas: I don't know what happened there, but I just notice my Wi Fi switch about to mind, it must have switched to
Windy Borjas: To the hotspot on the phone. That's probably why it
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: will last a big different degrees so much better. Okay.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So you're telling me about your culture.
Windy Borjas: Oh yeah, I'm here.
Windy Borjas: Here's the phone.
Windy Borjas: Taylor is a tribal Indians and she showed me his Pueblo Indians.
Windy Borjas: So, I mean,
Windy Borjas: They're pretty much the same. I guess like
Windy Borjas: In Espanola where I'm from that Pueblo. That's the table. A part of me. They have like the feast days and stuff like there's one in July, or one in June and one in August and their traditional foods like the end inbred
Windy Borjas: Like red chili, plus all
Windy Borjas: That kind of stuff.
Windy Borjas: They're more
Windy Borjas: Like Spanish ethnicity. To me, like in my views. Anyways, their foods are more similar.
Windy Borjas: As for tribal. They're like,
Windy Borjas: fry bread and buffalo me like totally different.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Uh, you have your part of both of those cultures.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Mm Hmm. Interesting.
Windy Borjas: Yeah.
Windy Borjas: I'm full Native American, but totally different versions of it, I guess.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Melting Pot of different values, different viewpoints. So tell me, what were some of the values or the viewpoints when it comes to women in the Native American culture.
Windy Borjas: From both
Windy Borjas: Both
Windy Borjas: Sides. I think they're pretty much the same.
Windy Borjas: I think about like everything I've learned on them and stuff like just the roles of each of male and female. And I mean,
Windy Borjas: They don't differ very much
Windy Borjas: Just like
Windy Borjas: The homemaker. The, the don't want to say provider, but in the home.
Windy Borjas: I mean,
Windy Borjas: On both sides.
Windy Borjas: I feel they view, you know, like the woman is supposed to prepare the food and keep the home clean
Windy Borjas: And, you know, comfortable
Windy Borjas: For the man because the man has to go out and gather the food and provides the home.
Windy Borjas: Very much.
Windy Borjas: And they don't really know
Windy Borjas: Too much like
Windy Borjas: What do you mean
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah, I'm just always curious to learn about the different cultures, because
Windy Borjas: Different cultures, watch the TV demon, please.
Windy Borjas: I'm sorry, but it gets his chest out when you're like mom mom mom mom mom give me. I'm sorry, a diet. I didn't have to wait.
Windy Borjas: Yeah.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So within different cultures. There's different like your value systems and the way they view things. So this helps me to kind of understand you better, as well as, you know, cultural influences if every culture has a viewpoint, or position about, for example, views about women.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: views about religion.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: And then views, perhaps about addiction.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Don't. That's where I was going with my question.
Windy Borjas: I guess I
Windy Borjas: I couldn't really, you know, say like I knew from my own experience, like they're like viewpoints, like with for my example addiction.
Windy Borjas: Just because
Windy Borjas: I guess I've never really been
Windy Borjas: Part of like my culture or
Windy Borjas: Into depth anyways. You know what I mean, like,
Windy Borjas: I I know about it i'm i'm
Windy Borjas: educated enough to know what and who I am.
Windy Borjas: I've just never been in that group of people. Yes, like
Windy Borjas: I remember being in school and there's always like, especially at the day school and elementary because I went to school on the football down there in SQL.
Windy Borjas: And there's always like a divide between like
Windy Borjas: The group of kids that were into dancing and their parents were real into our culture they spoke the language.
Windy Borjas: They, you know what I mean. Yeah.
Windy Borjas: They stuck together and then there was the other groups where our family families were involved in our culture, but they're more of like, like the audience, I guess you could say like
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: He was more like second generation, you know, and
Windy Borjas: It could be that it's just
Windy Borjas: That group I fill our families, our parents just didn't practice it as much as
Windy Borjas: The other kids would
Windy Borjas: Like
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: To the culture, they were learning the language and the dances and all that. And we were
Windy Borjas: Just viewing watching them. You know what I mean like are
Windy Borjas: You didn't speak it flew in.
Windy Borjas: I mean, my mom doesn't know it fluently, neither does my grandma. So it probably does have something to do with the generational
Yeah.
Windy Borjas: I mean, yeah. And now it just seems like
Windy Borjas: Nobody knows or nobody passes it down, anyone
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: I agree. I agree.
Windy Borjas: Cuz I remember
Windy Borjas: Even when I was young and like first second grade. I always wonder why like my my cousins and my aunties and uncles and grandma and everybody didn't speak it in the home.
Windy Borjas: They would hear my friends say like, you know, I mean, that's all they speak in their home.
Windy Borjas: And that divide that divide then didn't, it didn't like
Windy Borjas: Keep us away from each other that we didn't know that. I mean, we all mix and mingle with each other.
Windy Borjas: It was just, I noticed that growing up that there was that that divide between all the kids in the school.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah.
Windy Borjas: And then from
Windy Borjas: Pueblo day school. I went to
Windy Borjas: Public
Windy Borjas: So I kind of left all aspects of my culture behind. Just because when I moved to public schools. It's mostly Hispanics. I mean there is Native Americans, their books and as Viola, everybody is pretty much like
Windy Borjas: Hispanic cultural base.
Windy Borjas: Like native Native American
Windy Borjas: And Hispanics are pretty much like one thing in Espanol
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Noticing that I don't know if you remember, Wendy. I'm from Florida.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Born and raised. So when I got introduced to a lot of the New Mexico patients, I would have a variety of done the hat. They were from different Native American tribes.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: And then there were others that were Hispanics and so I was always like, wow, that's an interesting fusion of different cultures coming together and I always said I want to just learn more about
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Mexico, so that will my my clients, talk about it. I feel like I have a better understanding so that's that's helping me to understand the culture better
Windy Borjas: Yeah, it is. It is pretty crazy. I guess I never really put
Windy Borjas: Any thought into it but like back in Idaho, where I was born there shown a part that side of my family, it's totally different out there, an idol.
Windy Borjas: Like out here, everyone's pretty much like almost you could
Windy Borjas: Consider everybody Hispanic almost because that's, you know, I mean, we all
Windy Borjas: Speak Spanglish we all eat the same food like there's not a big difference. But like an Idaho between like this show me like Native American to just any other ethnicity.
Windy Borjas: They're completely different they'd all cross that line. There's no similarities between them at all.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So it's an interesting intersection between the cultures and I'm hearing you say that bill you have kind of like a foundation foundational understanding of what the culture is there weren't as much cultural influences within your family.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Because they have adapted more to, I guess, America or, you know, or maybe even just the community that you live in that place a difference as well.
Windy Borjas: Yeah, I think.
Windy Borjas: I think I'd be more community based
Windy Borjas: On that
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Point.
Just because
Windy Borjas: Like, though the vibe I guess how I would describe it, the vibe of like Espanola and just New Mexico in general is like it's one big community.
Windy Borjas: And it seems like anywhere else. It's
Windy Borjas: Just divided like certain people just don't mix it certain people or certain cultures. It's weird.
Windy Borjas: Because like out here in
Windy Borjas: Farmington where I'm at now.
Windy Borjas: Is totally different from like this and you'll area two mile area. It seems like out here like they're mostly Navajo out here, the Native American
Windy Borjas: There isn't a lot of like
Windy Borjas: Like mix native or Hispanic, Native if they're just Navajo and they're, they're really, really different compared to other Native American cultures, I've
Windy Borjas: You know, been around or gotten to know they're they're real it keep to themselves. They don't mix with any other ethnicities, or any other types of people
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So from your standpoint. What were some of the cultural influences when it came to religion. What was your upbringing, Yvonne system with that.
Um,
Windy Borjas: School. The only thing I could really say influence me cultural yes is elementary school from kindergarten through sixth grade.
Windy Borjas: So after that.
Windy Borjas: There was nothing. My mom, I mean she married a Hispanic
Windy Borjas: When we moved into New Mexico, like two or three years into us being here, she met a guy and he was Hispanic. So I think that and being I left you know my elementary school after sixth grade and went to public school and Espanola it's mostly Hispanic
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Mm hmm.
Windy Borjas: So I think that's where I i
Windy Borjas: Kind of conform more to that culture than
Windy Borjas: My Native American
And
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That's an interesting point will be settings and your environment.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Kind of influences what you're going to gravitate towards and what you will adapt to because perhaps that's why, like you mentioned early
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Earlier the culture kind of gets lost when it goes to different generations because now you're your influences are from all of your different chocolate experiences.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You're putting this together in context. And it's like, Okay, what, what value systems and icon and now relate to my child. And then that continues until different people adapt to different
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: settings that become more diverse, you know, as we continue to grow and evolve our communities get more diverse. So then the language and the culture kind of gets lost because then there's so many different things you can pull from.
Windy Borjas: And that's cool. That's crazy to think about
Windy Borjas: I've never thought about it like I think now with my daughter. Okay, so how my surroundings my settings changed it completely changed my way of of living like it steered me away from my own culture.
Windy Borjas: So I adapted to
Windy Borjas: Hispanic culture. So then, Adam even not even intentionally it'll just be out of habit. I'll pass that down to my daughter.
Windy Borjas: Yeah, she's
Windy Borjas: Half Native American happens, man.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah.
Windy Borjas: He's gonna gravitate
Windy Borjas: Toward the Hispanic way of life more than they
Windy Borjas: Are cancel, then there's one more person.
Windy Borjas: That just
Windy Borjas: Forgot about or didn't forget book wasn't given the chance to learn
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That side of
Windy Borjas: So there's one more person.
Windy Borjas: That doesn't pass it down.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah.
Windy Borjas: Why they say now.
Windy Borjas: Like my generation was like the cutoff for like
Windy Borjas: People passing down our culture like
Windy Borjas: In the table excited
Windy Borjas: cuz nobody does no more like my generation was the last to learn it. Our parents were the last ones that were trying to
Windy Borjas: Put a lot of us.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: To me, when I think of that.
Windy Borjas: You know, it is because I mean after a certain point, I mean all of our elders will be gone. Most of them already are.
Windy Borjas: Like I can only think of like maybe one or two that I remember.
Windy Borjas: That used to go and teach us our language in in the day school
Windy Borjas: And there was a lot of them. Now, just to I mean they're not going to live forever.
Windy Borjas: Yeah, there's
Windy Borjas: Those two people that are gone.
Windy Borjas: Nobody's and these new generations, nobody's trying to learn anything like that.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: seems overwhelming.
Windy Borjas: So it'll be it'll be gone.
Windy Borjas: At some point
Yeah.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: I can definitely relate my my father's Jamaican. My mom is African American. And so really wanting to learn more about the Jamaican culture.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: But when you have parents of different ethnicities. It's like okay one parent may be better at teaching the culture, either through their cooking.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Or, you know, religion, values and viewpoints. And so the only real cultural influences drag out from to make a culture was really the music and food.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: But my mom. It was the music. It was a food. It was religion viewpoints pulls all of those things and they're like you said, when I went to school. It was very diverse so mailing patient population.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So now, was that intersect of all of these different cultures and like you say your social environments, who you hang with you're going to attach to those cultures.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: If your parents are continuously sending the message of those cultures. So now with children. It's like, how do you, how do you integrate and kind of merge.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: The importance of African American culture Jamaican culture as well as Haitian culture. It's a fusion about these things. And now all of them will stick. There's one really one culture that kind of might fall to the wayside. And so now those cultural influences kind of get lost in transition.
Windy Borjas: It's, it's
Windy Borjas: It's crazy, because it's almost like like if you think of that and take it and put it into thought would like your family tree.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Mm hmm.
Windy Borjas: Almost like
Windy Borjas: Our whole like
Windy Borjas: Family tree is pretty much made up of a bunch of different like cultural beliefs.
Windy Borjas: Yeah, how they're changing. You know, like how
Windy Borjas: About with you and then with me.
Windy Borjas: With my daughter, it's going to change. So it would be kind of
Windy Borjas: Unreal to say that our family trees are. This is one
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Piece mapping. Exactly. Because it's not just the culture. It's that individual that is now relaying that. What was their interpretation of it.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Because of your interpretation.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You know the Native American tribes that you're connected with is different from someone else they may teach different things to their children as you would teach different things to your child.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So what what values, would you want to instill
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: In your daughter when it relates to your cultural upbringing.
Windy Borjas: Honestly, I don't think I know where to begin.
Windy Borjas: Just because i i don't think i i
Windy Borjas: point those out for myself and my own beliefs to be able to
Windy Borjas: Pass it down.
Windy Borjas: I am I wouldn't really know where to start.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah, I
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Think the reason why this conversation. I love having these conversations about culture because our value system really guides our decision making what religions, we grow up in.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You know, social environment and how we teach our children. So because my upbringing was so diverse, of different ethnicities was always important for me that my children go into a room for not everyone looks like them.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Where they're exposed to different cultures, because that's how you become more connected with people and you're not stuck in your ways.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So I think that was instilled in me to immerse with different people because Jamaica has you know Jamaicans
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: African American Jamaicans Chinese Jamaicans there's a broad variety Indian Jamaicans so I remember growing up and see my dad with just like phrase that always look so different. And I think that's important for kids to see the diversity of different cultures, so
Windy Borjas: That we don't learn boundaries like
Windy Borjas: Yeah, or like
Windy Borjas: Levels to place people no
Windy Borjas: One raises better than the other, I guess.
Windy Borjas: Because it seems like everything in life is just a cycle. I mean seems that
Windy Borjas: It just, you know, I mean,
Windy Borjas: continues to grow and go so
Windy Borjas: With that said, I'm sure. Eventually, like racism would become an issue again at some point in
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Time.
Windy Borjas: And I mean,
Windy Borjas: I guess not everybody's introducing their kids to the diverse
Windy Borjas: You know, communities or group of friends or whatever it may be.
Windy Borjas: Eventually,
Windy Borjas: History will repeat itself again.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah, because like you said your interpretation of the Navajo culture tribe is that they are just within their own community.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So diversity may not be as relevant to them as it would be to someone like you because you come from a mixture of having a Hispanic stepfather below, and then a Native American parent mother and your fiance. What's his that mystery.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah.
Windy Borjas: And spend
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Mm hmm. With a melting pot of all those different cultures.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yep.
Windy Borjas: That is so true. It's crazy. I think
Windy Borjas: I think I
Windy Borjas: I would just want to bring my daughter up
Windy Borjas: You know, I mean, diverse because I believe there isn't anybody on the earth. That's better than anybody there's nobody that's higher than anybody or more important or less important. I don't think there's a divide
Windy Borjas: I think we're all equal.
Windy Borjas: And there's a higher powers and that's what we know. I mean, people, I think, put a face to religion, maybe as a comfort or something to believe in someone to believe in
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: But
Windy Borjas: I think I don't believe there's ever been anybody that has
Windy Borjas: solid proof that that is God, you know the the Christian version or whoever.
Windy Borjas: I mean,
Windy Borjas: There is a higher power as I just said, and I think that's what I want my daughter to believe I'd rather her go through life believing in a higher power that's not there. And then to go and pass on and find that there isn't, then to live like there isn't and die and find out there is
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That's a good interpretation. So giving her something to aspire something to, you know, reflect on and column on in moments of despair versus having no connection or no belief anything
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That could be attached to your value system as well you know if your parents have that same belief about spirituality
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That may have contributed to your influence as well when it comes to your viewpoint.
Windy Borjas: Yeah, it could have, I think, when I think back to being young and like when I first started
Windy Borjas: Thinking about anything, cultural or spiritual. I just had a lot of confusion. Just because nobody ever taught me my Native American ways
Windy Borjas: I mean, there was a little bit, but after I left elementary school. It was pretty much just nothing into in my life anymore.
Windy Borjas: And I attached to Christianity. I think because
Windy Borjas: My step. My mom's first husband, his mom and his family would go to any Catholic. Sorry.
Windy Borjas: They're Catholic so
Windy Borjas: I guess I kind of went that way and then
Windy Borjas: Later on in life, like, and I was almost to graduate high school. My mom started going to Christian church, like all out of the blue, and she'd make us go
Windy Borjas: So I think it's just been a lot
Of
Windy Borjas: I don't want to say uncertainty, but a lot of
Women once I got that really
Windy Borjas: Nothing there was no like I don't want to say permanent. There's a word for it.
Windy Borjas: Consistency. Consistency. There you go. There's no consistency in my religion like
Windy Borjas: It went from
Windy Borjas: My native beliefs and then that was forgotten to Hispanic to Catholic and then that ended because the marriage ended.
Windy Borjas: And then my mom, you know, found the church, she goes to now so I was pulled that way. I think there's just a lot of uncertainty and not understanding, any of those cultures enough
Windy Borjas: To know what their values are
Windy Borjas: Is why I kind of in my own mind just created the higher power, you know, I mean,
Windy Borjas: I believe there is something greater than us.
But
Windy Borjas: I don't know what it what or who it is.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: But that's exactly, you know what you say how your social environment kind of changes your interpretation.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So when your mom, you know, married someone of a different ethnicity and balance the religion. She aligned with whatever those religious values work. So kind of like adapting to this new environment.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: And some people are flexible with that their fluid when it comes to different cultures and values systems where some people and that's why they won't go outside their culture.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Because they don't want to be influenced their set more in their foundation and their beliefs. So quaint outside their culture is almost kind of like a bit spread it to their bodies.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: To. I see. That's probably why her interpretation of what a higher power was our definition of spirituality change contingent upon whatever relationships.
Windy Borjas: And it's crazy because
Windy Borjas: That makes me think about just like the world in general like that divide
Windy Borjas: Like that divide
Windy Borjas: Could I mean if you thought about it and put it into aspect of like just just as wars and fighting and all that, like throughout the world, like if people would conform to different people and different religions.
Windy Borjas: Then love would make the world go around because I think that was the original saying they say Money makes the world go down, but I just don't believe that.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Some of them under understanding and even if you know there may not be a personal connection. There's a respect for that.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You know the little different cultures that I was associated with one of Native American but
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That brings out that curiosity, even more so to want to learn about it so that interest in that respect for the differences in upbringings is what allows for conversations like this to happen.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Because now, no one's kind of, you know, I'm not trying to convince you about my Jamaican, you know, culture, you're not trying to, we're just now in a place of educating
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: And sharing and through that were both having those aha moments like you know because when you talk about how you went to elementary school and then you think
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You know, that's probably why the Jamaican culture kind of got a little pushed to the back burner, because now my influences more Haitian culture.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So sometimes I can be in a room with Jamaicans and they're speaking patois, and sometimes I don't understand everything. I'm like, trying to keep up.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: And then I feel a little guilty that I don't really understand like, this is your culture. This is within your bloodline your DNA, you don't understand everything but also my upbringing and my social interactions plays a huge part in what I will know about my culture.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah.
Windy Borjas: It is
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: True, because
Windy Borjas: I remember I used to know
Windy Borjas: Taylor and Shawn both languages.
Windy Borjas: And I never knew Spanish. I only knew my to cultural languages, English
Windy Borjas: And I think that I stopped.
Windy Borjas: Being taught. She's shown me when I was like
Like
Windy Borjas: Six. I think
Windy Borjas: And it completely it completely died out. I do not know the language Omar, and that's that I used to be able to count to 100 and everything.
Windy Borjas: And take a walk.
Windy Borjas: I will stop learning, and being taught in sixth grade. The last year I was at the elementary school and I completely, completely forgot it. I don't know at all. No more.
Windy Borjas: I know numbers alphabet everything
Windy Borjas: And now I understand Spanish fluently.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Really
Windy Borjas: And I'm partially fluent speaking it
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: I can it for the most part, and almost right. It
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Hmm. So it sounds like social social interactions and engagement probably needs more to influences in life in general, then culture opinion on you know your influences
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Because some people if that culture is continuously embedded within them, and they stay in Merced within that culture, then it doesn't get lost.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: But the common denominator is still being immersed still be connected with that culture when there is no connection. It's definitely going to get lots and
Windy Borjas: Yeah.
Windy Borjas: It will, and my, my daughter will probably continue on her path with more Hispanic
Windy Borjas: Cultural. You know what I mean, believe
Windy Borjas: That ground just because
Windy Borjas: That's what she's growing up around. I mean, I'm not around my family. And when we do go I know she'll be real timid and scared. She's not going to just go jump and jump into my grandma's arms and want to stay there. You know, I mean,
Windy Borjas: My graph is the only the last one in my whole family that knows that side of our culture. I don't know anybody else.
Windy Borjas: She didn't pass
Windy Borjas: I mean, I don't want to say she didn't pass it down. We didn't take the time to learn. That's what it is. It's not about our elders and not doing what they're supposed to. It's just that we just the way of life completely changed in my generation.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: I guess they told us that my
Windy Borjas: My generation was the cutoff point our parents were the last ones. After that, we started on a new generation and we don't even know what we're supposed to be teaching so therefore it is probably died then. Yeah.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah. You mentioned elders, so does grandma ever might complain that, you know, there's this disconnect between the generations and and then not understanding the culture.
Windy Borjas: Not really. She's, she's said it a few times but
Windy Borjas: Like, she said, I can only do so much for what I'm responsible for. She said, I'm not responsible for the whole community. My responsibility was you guys but you guys didn't listen
Windy Borjas: She said, and I'm not going to spend my remaining years chasing after you trying to force it down your throat. If you don't want to learn, then you don't. She said, if I'm alive long enough to be able to teach my great great grandkids and start a new generation. She said, I will
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: But
Windy Borjas: If they put up a fight, and I have to force them. Then I'm just going to give up. She said, I guess it'll die with me.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You know, that's a message that can be spread in all aspects of life, because what I heard is our responsibility is to her support network, not the overall community.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: And even if my responsibility is to my support network if they don't receive what I'm giving and all well so that can be applied in so many different aspects to when there's people that you know support a want to encourage they don't want it.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So, okay, you don't want it then.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: I have the information I have them up to give a half the support, but if someone doesn't want it then doesn't take away any value from who I am and what I have to offer.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yes, a very significant message that can translate it to other thing.
Windy Borjas: It is I never really thought about it like that, but it is
Windy Borjas: Because I think about like with my addiction.
Windy Borjas: I remember my grandma being the one that like I guess kind of made my mom like realize that there was nothing in this world that was going to stop me from using and
Windy Borjas: Continuing to destroy my life and my health and everything but myself because she will tell my mom all the time. I don't know why you you
Windy Borjas: chased after her and try to force her to go to rehab and try to make her make that change in her life. She said, You can't, you're not going to change until she wants to change.
Windy Borjas: There's no point, no matter how much money you spend on rehabs matter how many times she tells you, yes, I promise. I promise not to do it in her heart. That's what she wants to do.
Windy Borjas: Yeah, and it was true.
Windy Borjas: And I told so many
Windy Borjas: You know, other fellow addicts recovering addicts that I've met throughout my recovery that same thing if you relapse and or you haven't even attempted or succeeded recovery yet, you're not going to succeed it and really do it until that's what you want to do.
Windy Borjas: Otherwise, I think it's a waste of
Windy Borjas: Time. I mean, in my own experience, it has been every time, every time I was doing it to make my mom feel better or make somebody else happy, it just didn't work out. Yeah.
Windy Borjas: Only when I made that choice for
Windy Borjas: Myself, did I, you know, achieve it, and here I am today.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So what keeps you committed to the sobriety. What is your, your position.
Windy Borjas: Um, before
Windy Borjas: Before I had my daughter. I don't think I really had one, to be honest.
Windy Borjas: I mean, I was proud of myself for doing it. I didn't. It was just more of the I achieved it. Yeah.
Windy Borjas: And I mean, I made it through that.
Windy Borjas: Threshold and not a lot of people can do it in the time that I did myself. So I guess that was kind of the only thing that I really like took from it. And then when I had my daughter.
Windy Borjas: She's, she's my
Windy Borjas: Rock that yes, I try to remind myself of what it's going to do to her, or how it would affect her if I did relapse fully and when I mean put her through how like I have
Windy Borjas: My mom and my grandma and everybody
Windy Borjas: And I just think about the looks on their faces. They had on all the times I broke their heart like I couldn't see my daughter, looking at me like that.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: The prior to your daughter, it was you feeling proud of yourself that this is what I was able to accomplish in this time. So you took
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Pride in ownership of your sobriety. But now with your daughter. It's not only about your tribe, but it's like
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: The impacts how my sobriety to influence someone's life how my addiction can impact someone's life. So, you know, I think all those
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Are a good fusion of value systems for sobriety. Because also having that self fulfillment and accomplishment that wow I'm able to maintain my sobriety.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You know, for me, but also I'm impacting influencing MY DAUGHTER AND I'M POSITIVE WAY because of myself the discipline of my control and ability to stay sober.
Yeah.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That's a good message for other people that are in addiction to figure out what exactly is your value. What keeps you committed to the sobriety.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: And oftentimes, a lot of people don't have the answers. And it's not to say that if you don't have the answers that you're going to relax the next day.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: But it's it's those answers is those values and those commitments that you will bring that keeps you when you're having a rough day and you think the easy thing would be to do this, but they remind yourself of this is the reason why I'm doing it first.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So it's like those moments as a mom or you're like really exhausted and all of a sudden you get this energy to do something because
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: The kid says something, or does something in a way that reminds you like it's not only about me. Let me get out of this. And let me do what's needed for it.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So I think that's that boost that that search power that people can get in there course of sobriety and they're getting lost, and they don't really know what's keeping them who need that shot me that boost that reminds you, this is why I'm committed to doing
Windy Borjas: I think a lot of people
Windy Borjas: Forget like you know in recovery that it is that one little simple thought that can reverse you from making a big mistake or a relapse that you know i mean ends up destroying your entire sobriety.
Windy Borjas: I mean, it's something that small
Windy Borjas: For me, I mean, I still struggle with it, just because
Windy Borjas: Getting high is the only coping mechanism I have ever learned my whole life. I
Windy Borjas: I was never showed a different way.
Windy Borjas: Nor was I taught the right way to cope and I mean I didn't
Windy Borjas: I didn't get this reaction from watching anybody. It was just the only thing that I found when I was younger, that numbed it completely. I didn't have to deal with it.
Windy Borjas: I totally lost my point.
Windy Borjas: I was getting to a point and I lost it.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Now one fight that
Windy Borjas: Oh yeah, that was it. Yeah, it
Windy Borjas: It can be something that tiny because
Windy Borjas: Before my daughter.
Windy Borjas: Just the thought of all I achieve this already. I've made it this far, am I really gonna go and throw a year down the drain for a couple hours.
Windy Borjas: That was a thought.
Windy Borjas: In I mean something that small can can really steer you for making a big mistake.
Yeah.
Windy Borjas: Because no matter how many times you tell yourself.
Windy Borjas: That you know one. Do I pot one little relapse isn't going to affect you. It can spiral out of control within those few minutes
Windy Borjas: It's crazy. I just now that I've gotten older, and I've paid attention like since I started with bright heart. I just
Windy Borjas: Paid real close attention to how I react to certain things and what triggers me like in depth, though not just off the top of my head. Like, I've actually sat there and thought about it. What was it that made me feel, you know, like I wanted to relax. Yeah.
Windy Borjas: And it's nice to
Windy Borjas: To be able to almost have it under control.
Windy Borjas: Because
Windy Borjas: The point where I'm at now, you know,
Windy Borjas: I'm trying to teach myself to
Windy Borjas: To react in a differently, like if I feel that trigger and I'm about to relapse or instead of running off and going and getting you know what bag, why don't I go get my daughter.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Yeah.
Windy Borjas: So hopefully I can ask you that.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You already learned some confidence skills and the fact that you're curious and that you can really explore in depth, like you said, not just from a surface level really a process.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: What is sugar. And what's really behind this. That's how you get to it and you've already identified some of those red flags thoughts that leads you to addiction when it's like okay
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Just this one thing you know it's not gonna happen in the world. The lucky said that that high that you have for a few hours.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: It affects it impacts your life and they have to start over. All over.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: So putting those things into perspective and challenging when those red flag thoughts come up because now you've identified to that that comes to my mind. I know that's my addictive way speaking
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: That's not the sober voice that is committed to being a good parent that is empowered by discipline.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: This is the attic that wants to convince me that it's going to be okay.
Windy Borjas: Exactly.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: I think this was a really good session. I learned a lot about your culture and some of the values that you want to instill in your dog.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: When would you like to meet again.
Windy Borjas: Oh,
Windy Borjas: We can meet sometime next week. If you have
Windy Borjas: A time of not
Windy Borjas: Following fine.
Windy Borjas: Whatever is
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Next week on
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: But let's do the following Thursday.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Which will be joining 11
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: At five. Does that work for you.
Windy Borjas: I shit I broke your thing. Damn. Sorry.
Windy Borjas: I'm old. I'm looking
Windy Borjas: I'm K June 11. Why does that sound.
Windy Borjas: Familiar
Windy Borjas: Oh no that's July. So I'm thinking okay so June 11 of
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: June 11 at five o'clock works for you. Yeah, okay.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Great. I'll see you then.
Windy Borjas: Thank you.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: You too. Bye bye.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: cultural implications and cultural factors as it relates to addiction to spirituality
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Viewpoints as well as gender will discuss in this session.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Dialogue in regards to a different mind vs sober mind values were brought up within this discussion CVT skills for us within this session.
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Patient on presented with
Jessica Bailey-Pierre: Common and appropriate effect seeing improvement from last week's session. So I will work on updating her treatment plan at the next session and tying in cultural values as it relates to sobriety and onboarding sessions.